https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/relativeppp.asp

    What Is Relative Purchasing Power Parity (RPPP)?

Relative purchasing power parity (RPPP) is an expansion of the
traditional purchasing power parity <https://www.investopedia.com/
updates/purchasing-power-parity-ppp/> (PPP) theory to include changes in
inflation over time. Purchasing power is the power of money expressed by
the number of goods or services that one unit can buy, and which can be
reduced by inflation <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/
inflation.asp>. RPPP suggests that countries with higher rates of
inflation will have a devalued currency.


      Key Takeaways

  * Relative purchasing power parity (RPPP) is an economic theory that
    states that exchange rates and inflation rates (price levels) in two
    countries should equal out over time.
  * Relative PPP is an extension of absolute PPP in that it is a dynamic
    (as opposed to static) version of PPP.
  * While PPP is useful in understanding macroeconomics in theory, in
    practice RPPP does not seem to hold true over short time horizons.


    Understanding Relative Purchasing Power Parity (RPPP)

​​​​​​​According to relative purchasing power parity (RPPP), the
difference between the two countries’ rates of inflation and the cost of
commodities will drive changes in the exchange rate <https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/e/exchangerate.asp> between the two countries.

RPPP expands on the idea of purchasing power parity and complements the
theory of absolute purchasing power parity (APPP). The APPP concept
declares that the exchange rate between the two nations will be equal to
the ratio of the price levels for those two countries, and APPP is
discussed later in this article.


    Purchasing Power Parity in Theory

Purchasing power parity (PPP) is the idea that goods in one country will
cost the same in another country, once their exchange rate is applied.
According to this theory, two currencies <https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/c/currency.asp> are at par when a market basket of goods is valued
the same in both countries.

The comparison of prices of identical items in different countries will
determine the PPP rate; however, an exact comparison is difficult due to
differences in product quality, consumer attitudes, and economic
conditions in each nation. Also, purchasing power parity is a
theoretical concept that may not be true in the real world, especially
in the short run.


In 2023, the purchasing power index of the United States is 115.75.1


    Dynamics of RPPP

RPPP is essentially a dynamic form of PPP, as it relates the change in
two countries’ inflation rates to the change in their exchange rate. The
theory holds that inflation will reduce the real purchasing power
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/purchasingpower.asp> of a nation's
currency. Thus if a country has an annual inflation rate of 10%, that
country's currency will be able to purchase 10% less real goods at the
end of one year.

RPPP also complements the theory of absolute purchasing power parity
(APPP), which maintains that the exchange rate between two countries
will be identical to the ratio of the price levels for those two countries.

This concept comes from a basic idea known as the law of one price
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/law-one-price.asp>. This theory
states that the real cost of a good must be the same across all
countries after the consideration of the exchange rate.


    Example of RPPP

Suppose that over the next year, inflation causes average prices for
goods in the U.S. to increase by 3%. In the same period, prices for
products in Mexico increased by 6%. We can say that Mexico has had
higher inflation than the U.S. since prices there have risen faster by
three points.

According to the concept of relative purchase power parity, that three-
point difference will drive a three-point change in the exchange rate
between the U.S. and Mexico. So we can expect the Mexican peso to
depreciate <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/currency-
depreciation.asp> at the rate of 3% per year, or that the U.S. dollar
should appreciate at the rate of 3% per year.


    Limitations of RPPP

Users of RPPP information must be mindful of several limitations in the
inherent process of calculating RPPP. Some of the limitations include:

  * *Inaccurate Assumption of Perfect Competition. *RPPP assumes perfect
    competition in all markets which is often not the case in the real
    world. Imperfect competition, market distortions, and barriers to
    trade can lead to deviations from RPPP.
  * *Inaccurate Assumptions that Goods Are Homogeneous.* RPPP assumes
    that goods and services are identical across countries, which is
    rarely true in reality. Differences in product quality, branding,
    and consumer preferences can affect price levels.
  * *Excluded Transport Costs and Trade Barriers:* RPPP does not
    consider transportation costs or trade barriers, which can
    significantly impact the prices of internationally traded goods and
    create deviations from parity.
  * *Not All Goods Are Tradeable:* RPPP focuses on tradable goods and
    services, but many items are not easily traded across borders (e.g.,
    housing, local services). These non-traded goods can create
    disparities in price levels.
  * *Limited Data and Timing:* Accurate and timely data on price levels
    can be challenging to obtain, especially in developing countries,
    making it difficult to apply RPPP accurately.


Exchange rates can also be influenced by speculative trading and market
sentiment; therefore, actual exchange rates may deviate from RPPP
calculations.


    RPPP vs. APPP

There's a couple of differences between relative purchasing power parity
and absolute purchasing power parity (APPP). First, PPP is primarily
concerned with comparing the relative price levels of two or more
countries to determine their exchange rates. Absolute PPP is a simpler
concept that focuses on the absolute price levels within a single country.

Second, PPP suggests that exchange rates should adjust over time to
equalize the purchasing power of currencies, allowing for a more
accurate representation of the real exchange rate. APPP implies that
exchange rates should be fixed or constant based on the ratio of
absolute price levels between two countries.

Last, PPP takes into account changes in price levels over time while
APPP does not. Because APP assumes that exchange rates should always be
at a constant ratio, it does not account for inflation.


    What Is the Formula for Purchasing Power Parity?

The formula for purchasing power parity (PPP) is Cost of Good X in
Currency 1 / Cost of Good X in Currency 2. This allows an individual to
make comparisons of currencies and the value of a basket of goods they
can buy.


    What Country Has the Highest Purchasing Power?

According to the crowdsourced database Numbeo, Luxembourg has the
highest purchasing power with a purchasing power index number of 127.1
in 2023. Other top countries include Qatar (123.6), United Arab Emirates
(123.4), and Switzerland (118.7). The lowest country in 2023 is Nigeria
(8.4).1


    Why Is Purchasing Power Parity Important?

Purchasing power parity is important because it allows economists to
compare two different economies <https://www.investopedia.com/articles/
fundamental-analysis/ppp-big-mac.asp>, primarily the economic
productivity and the standard of living among nations. It seeks to
equalize currencies to determine the value of a basket of goods.


    The Bottom Line

Relative purchasing power parity is an economic theory that suggests
exchange rates between two countries' currencies should adjust over time
to reflect differences in their price levels. According to PPP, if one
country experiences higher inflation than another, its currency should
depreciate to maintain the same purchasing power across borders,
promoting equilibrium in international trade.

Article Sources
Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their
work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting,
and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original
research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can
learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased
content in our editorial policy. <https://www.investopedia.com/
legal-4768893#EditorialPolicy>

 1.

    Numbeo. "Purchasing Power Index by Country 2023 <https://
    www.numbeo.com/quality-of-life/rankings_by_country.jsp?
    title=2023&displayColumn=1>."

Open a New Bank Account
Advertiser Disclosure

×
The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which
Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and
where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers
available in the marketplace.
Sponsor
Name
Description

Related Terms
Burgernomics: What It Means, How It Works <https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/b/burgernomics.asp> Burgernomics refers to the Economist's Big Mac
Index, which tracks purchasing power parity using the cost of a
McDonald's Big Mac as the price benchmark.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/burgernomics.asp>
Understanding Purchasing Power and the Consumer Price Index <https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/p/purchasingpower.asp> Purchasing power is
the value of a currency in terms of the goods or services one unit of it
can buy. Discover how purchasing power impacts investors.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/purchasingpower.asp>
Starbucks Index: What it is, How it Works, Criticisms <https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/s/starbucks-index.asp> The Starbucks Index is
a measure of purchasing power parity comparing the cost of a tall latte
in local currency against the U.S. dollar in 16 countries.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/starbucks-index.asp>
Big Mac PPP: Overview, Calculations, Disadvantages <https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bigmacppp.asp> The Big Mac PPP is a survey
done by The Economist that examines the purchasing power of various
currencies based on the relative price of a Big Mac.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bigmacppp.asp>
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Formula and How to Use It <https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/g/gdp.asp> Gross domestic product is the
monetary value of all finished goods and services made within a country
during a specific period.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/gdp.asp>
Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (UIP): Definition and Calculation
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/u/uncoveredinterestrateparity.asp>
Uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) is a theory that the difference in
two countries' interest rates is equal to the expected changes between
their currency exchange rates.
more <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/u/uncoveredinterestrateparity.asp>
Related Articles
A McDonald's Big Mac is seen on an advertisement in the U.K. as people
walk by
Burgernomics: What It Means, How It Works
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/burgernomics.asp>
Purchasing Power
Understanding Purchasing Power and the Consumer Price Index
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/purchasingpower.asp>
Starbucks Index: What it is, How it Works, Criticisms
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/starbucks-index.asp>
US and China trade barrier, an action by a government that makes trade
between the country and other countries more difficult, decoraton glass
globe on US dollar and china yuan banknotes
What Is Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), and How Is It Calculated?
<https://www.investopedia.com/updates/purchasing-power-parity-ppp/>
McDonald's Big Mac.
Big Mac PPP: Overview, Calculations, Disadvantages
<https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bigmacppp.asp>
What Is the Big Mac Index? Definition, What It Shows, and Example
<https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/09/big-mac-index.asp>
Partner Links

<https://www.investopedia.com/>

  * <https://www.facebook.com/Investopedia/>
  * <https://www.instagram.com/investopedia/?hl=en>
  * <https://twitter.com/investopedia>
  * <https://www.linkedin.com/company/investopedia-ulc>
  * <https://www.investopedia.com/investopedia-newsletter-opt-in-7095821>

TRUSTe <https://privacy.truste.com/privacy-seal/validation?
rid=f8e1238d-6371-460f-8ea0-1b8cad9e9c4b>

  * About Us <https://www.investopedia.com/about-us-5093223>
  * Terms of Service <https://www.dotdashmeredith.com/brands-termsofservice>
  * Dictionary <https://www.investopedia.com/financial-term-
    dictionary-4769738>
  * Editorial Policy <https://www.investopedia.com/
    legal-4768893#editorial-policy>
  * Advertise <https://www.dotdashmeredith.com/>
  * News <https://www.investopedia.com/news-4427706>
  * Privacy Policy <https://www.dotdashmeredith.com/brands-privacy>
  * Contact Us <https://invcontent.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/requests/new>
  * Careers <https://www.dotdashmeredith.com/careers>
  * Your Privacy Choices<#>

  * # <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-num-4769350>
  * A <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-a-4769351>
  * B <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-b-4769352>
  * C <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-c-4769353>
  * D <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-d-4769354>
  * E <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-e-4769355>
  * F <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-f-4769356>
  * G <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-g-4769357>
  * H <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-h-4769358>
  * I <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-i-4769359>
  * J <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-j-4769360>
  * K <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-k-4769361>
  * L <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-l-4769362>
  * M <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-m-4769363>
  * N <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-n-4769364>
  * O <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-o-4769365>
  * P <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-p-4769366>
  * Q <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-q-4769367>
  * R <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-r-4769368>
  * S <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-s-4769369>
  * T <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-t-4769370>
  * U <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-u-4769371>
  * V <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-v-4769372>
  * W <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-w-4769373>
  * X <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-x-4769374>
  * Y <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-y-4769375>
  * Z <https://www.investopedia.com/terms-beginning-with-z-4769376>

Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith <https://
www.dotdashmeredith.com/> publishing family.
